---
title: About
permalink: /about
author: muziejus
---

# About Plain Plain Text

Plain Plain Text is a project dedicated to providing modular tutorials for
humanists interested in using [plain
text](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plain_text) in their scholarly
communication. There are many benefits to moving to plain text, but we also
know that it can be intimidating. Change typically is, and getting used to new
software is famously tricky; even computer scientists hate upgrading. What
follows is a brief description of how the site works, followed by a longer
discussion about plain text in general. 

## Modular. Tutorials.

These two terms describe the scope of Plain Plain text. By “modular,” we mean
that the tutorials are all made up of smaller pieces, of increasing
specificity and granularity. Pedagogically, the hope is that the learner
reaches two goals. First, we hope that modularity shows how every technical
challenge is, fundamentally, a question of making a bunch of smaller decisions
in an order that achieves the desired effect. “Install a plain text editor”
can be seen as one command or as several. We aim to present it as both at
once. Furthermore, modularity reveals the interrelated nature of technical
issues. As such, we create one tutorial for “Install a plain text editor,” yet
it shows up, as its own self-contained entity, in several. Recognition and
familiarity are useful in the pedagogical process, so we hope the learner will
see modules and say, “oh, I already know how to do that.” and see how their
mastery grows.

By “tutorials,” we mean lessons that achieve specific ends. As such, we aren’t
describing “a workflow,” useful and inspirational as those sorts of articles
can be. Instead, we are showing a concrete means by which a learner can reach
a concrete end. It is our hope that as the learner completes more tutorials,
thinking about the subject matter more abstractly (connections and
components!) will become easier, thereby letting the learner move on to using
the tutorials as foundations for solving problems _not_ covered in them. Also
indicative of the concrete nature of the tutorials is that they all start with
the expression “I want to.” This expression, partly inherited from [user
stories](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_story), helps limit the scope of
each tutorial while also converting the tutorial into an tractable action.
Creation remains always central, then, to the pedagogical process on this site.

## Why Plain Text?

Lots of people have tackled this question, and we possibly don’t have much to
add. Kieran Healy, for example, wrote “[The Plain Person’s Guide to Plain Text
Social Science](https://kieranhealy.org/publications/plain-person-text/),” and
Healy has been a useful starting point for humanists interested in plain
text. Healy argues that given the clutter of scholarly work, an “engineering
model” relying on plain text is useful. That is, the various components that
go into a project all tend to be in plain text, so it makes sense that
everything should be (here Healy, with data central to the project, shows a
bit of disciplinary bias, but humanists are not the intended audience anyway).
Plain text helps with organization, with keeping a record, with
reproducing work through minimizing error, and, finally, by automating
repetitive tasks.

Dennis Tenen and Grant Wythoff, on the other hand, writing in “[Sustainable
Authorship in Plain Text using Pandoc and
Markdown](https://programminghistorian.org/lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdown),” start giving away the
reasons in the title. They specify five principles that guide them, which do
differ from Healy: sustainability, human-readability, separation
of form and content, support for academic apparatus (footnotes), and platform
independence. A recent convert to plain text, Scott Selisker, in “[A Plain
Text Workflow for Academic Writing with
Atom](http://u.arizona.edu/~selisker/post/workflow/)” asks the question “why?”
explicitly, answering in ways similar to Healy and Tenen and Wythoff. This all
makes sense; they cite each other, and that’s great!

I agree with all of the above. Again, I don’t have much to add, except to
underscore the limits of purity testing on these issues. Every new cohort of
incoming first-years to University is more and more locked into a very tight
ecosystem ruled by Word and Google Docs, where students rely on the (very good
and fast) search functions of their operating systems as a replacement for
structure of their files. Healy’s “engineer model” seems more and more distant
from just asking Siri to find your paper. Similarly, Tenen and Wythoff’s
issues regarding sustainability seem quaint in an age of seemingly free cloud
backups. If iCloud goes away one day, we now seem to think, far more serious
problems will have manifested themselves than that our college papers have
disappeared.

The point is, first and foremost, I think that if you like what you’re using
now, good. Stick with it. If you yet again have Microsoft Word patronizing you
in some way that makes you want to throw your computer away and return to
longhand, well, I (or, really, back to “we”) are here to tell you there’s a
better way. 

Because more than anything, plain text rewards its users with _control_, as
Healy is quick to point out. Users
can take as much or as little control over the plain text as they like, but
it’s responsive to it all. It doesn’t patronize. It presents itself as it is
and challenges the user to be creative with it. And that creativity comes with
satisfaction, a little frustration, and, more than anything, a sense of close
involvement with the work. 

Plain Plain Text doesn’t, then, make a moral argument for plain text, though
that’s a good one. It doesn’t make an abstractly organizational one either,
though that’s also a good one. Plain Plain Text—back to we—simply invite the
user to try and regain control over their work and, in so doing, breathe more
life into it.

## What Is Plain Text?

Well, [there’s a _Wikipedia_ page for
that](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plain_text). But for the purposes of Plain
Plain Text, we mean text files (typically, but not necessarily, saved with an
`.md` extension for [Markdown]({{ site.baseurl }}/whatis/Markdown)) that use
freely available and nearly universal conventions established a half century
or so ago. These files focus on the content of the work, not on the finished
results. Therefore, they are better thought of as part of a _project_ as
opposed to a specific _document_. Though they work for that, too. 

Plain text remains a convention even in our daily computing lives. Tweets are
plain text. Commenting on message boards relies on plain text. Facebook
status updates are plain text. The entire web, in fact, is made up of plain
text files. We typically use plain text in our emails, and even when we
pretend we aren’t, the emails are still sent as a heavily marked up version of
plain text. When we write Wordpress blog posts, we may select sections and
make them bold or change the font. But ultimately Wordpress, too, converts all
that to plain text. 

Yet in our scholarly lives, we accept being divorced from plain text. It is
possible to extract the text out of a Word document, but all the formatting
will be lost, not to speak of the footnotes, etc. A pdf is even more opaque,
especially since the text embedded in it is often just a computer’s best guess
at what the letters it “sees” are.

In other words, plain text is an inscapable part of our everyday, and we hope
to make the case for making it part of your scholarly day, too.

## Who Are You?

Plain Plain Text was started by me, Moacir P. de Sá Pereira, largely in response
to the three articles referred to above. I’ve been a plain text evangelist for
over two decades, despite being a Word user for nearly three. Nevertheless, I
was an undergraduate just as the internet took off and began covering
technologies that had been wholly “plain text” in look and use—like email,
Usenet or chat—with a veneer of “usability” that alienated the user from the
plain text. The massive adoption of Gmail, for example, overturned decades of
established netiquette regarding plain text communication to provide an email
experience that hid everything from the user except the recipient, subject,
and a box for top-posting content. 

Some of the impetus for Plain Plain Text, then, may just sound like nostalgia,
but for that I return to the issue of control above. We have given away
control over our digital lives in so many ways over the past few decades,
especially to companies like Google and Facebook that don’t deserve it and
don’t bother giving us a percentage of the money they make off us. As such,
again, without making a moral argument, Plain Plain Text is interested in
propagating the humanistic goals of inquiry and critique, of providing
alternatives to hegemony. 

As Plain Plain Text grows, I hope more people will volunteer to help write
modules. Part of why the first tutorial is on writing a blog post for Jekyll
is precisely because it demonstrates, as well, how one can contribute to this
project.

So, happy plain texting, and hopefully the materials here are presented
appropriately plainly, yet usefully.
