# plain-plain-text-www

Plain Plain Text is a website that introduces and advocates for the use of
plain text in the humanities and social sciences. Plain text evangelists in
these disciplines can be found all over the internet, where in various blog
posts they describe, often is overwhelming detail, their various workflows.

Instead, we take a modular approach to our evangelism and pedagogy. If you
already have a text editor installed, you can skip that section. If you
understand Git, skip… and so on. Similarly, because the various steps are
modular, they can be reproduced throughout the site, keeping the information
current and, hopefully, fresh for every semester’s new batch of graduate
students who have *had it* with Microsoft Word.

## Audience

Anyone can, of course, use these tutorials, but they are written with a
student in the social sciences or humanities in mind. That means that they do
not assume familiarity with the command line, or scripting, or anything like
that. They assume that the user is comfortable moving files around and using
a program like Word to write. 

That said, because of the specific interests of scholars in these fields, the
order in which we make tutorials will reflect those needs. For example, few
people need to worry about keeping a print and online version of their CV
current and handsome. On the other hand, every scholar has to brush up their
CV every once in a while, as the document accompanies job applications, grant
proposals, and many other aspects of academic life. 

## Ground Rules

We are *opinionated*. What that means, in programming terms, is that we make
many, many assumptions about how you “should” organize your projects and move
through these tutorials. This includes what software you should use and what
online services you should use. You are, of course, welcome to substitute your
own solutions, but we only guarantee that our way works.

Similarly, we are committed to free and open software and we encourage
inclusivity and accessibility in our pedagogy. Hence, all of the tutorials
here use free software except for the operating system. Concretely, throughout
these tutorials, you will be introduced to the ecosystem of Atom, Git, Pandoc,
and TeX. These four tools will get you everywhere you need to go, whether
that’s writing a cover letter or ensuring the quality of your dissertation’s
bibliography.

## How to Start

Tutorials are split into two categories: “I want to learn” and “I want to
create.” The former introduce software conceptually and describe various
features of the software without a specific project in mind. They provide the
foundational modules for the second set, which teach, step-by-step, through to
a specific goal. Our hope is that you understand the steps well enough to be
able to adjust the material for your own needs, or at least learn how to look
for help.

## Who Are We?

We are scholars from various disciplines who are convinced that there’s a
better way to create scholarly materials, specifically writing. We both enjoy
the wide flexibility offered by the software we use and its slight old-school
aesthetic that foregrounds letters on a background, moving the focus of the
scholar toward the content and, hopefully, away from the irritations and
frippery of expensive word processing systems.

Specifically, this project was begun by [Moacir P. de Sá
Pereira](http://moacir.com) ([@muziejus](http://github.com/muziejus) on
GitHub), who has occasionally written plain text tutorials and helped people
get about that plain text life for two decades. 
